WIP: Listing write steps for Core and Enterprise (#5881)
influxdata/docs-v2: content/shared/influxdb3-internals-reference/durability.md

## How data flows through {{% product-name %}}

When data is written to {{% product-name %}}, it progresses through multiple stages to ensure durability, optimize performance, and enable efficient querying. Configuration options at each stage affect system behavior, balancing reliability and resource usage.

## Data flow for writes

As written data moves through {{% product-name %}}, it follows a structured path to ensure durability, efficient querying, and optimized storage.

{{< img-hd src="/img/influxdb3/influxdb3-core-enterprise-ingest-path-flow.png" alt="Ingest path and data flow for InfluxDB 3 Core & Enterprise" />}}
<span class="caption">Figure: Write request, response, and ingest flow for InfluxDB 3 Core and Enterprise</span>

1. [Write validation and memory buffer](#1-write-validation-and-memory-buffer)
2. [Write-ahead log (WAL) persistence](#2-write-ahead-log-wal-persistence)

> 3. [Query availability](#3-query-availability)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. [Query availability](#query-availability)
```

> 4. [Parquet storage](#4-parquet-storage)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. [Parquet storage](#parquet-storage)
```

> ## How Data Flows Through InfluxDB 3

Reviewer: All headings should be sentence case, following [Google Developer Documentation style](https://developers.google.com/style/headings).

When data is written to {{% product-name %}}, it progresses through multiple stages to ensure durability, optimize performance, and enable efficient querying. Configuration options at each stage affect system behavior, balancing reliability and resource usage.

### Write Path Overview

> {{% product-name %}} processes data through several stages to ensure durability, query performance, and efficient storage. Below is a high-level overview of these stages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% product-name %}} processes data through the following stages to ensure durability, query performance, and efficient storage:
```
Avoid using positional words like "before" and "above" when referring to content sections. You can use something like "later in this guide", but there's often a better way to organize or link that avoids it altogether.

> 

Reviewer: 👍

1. [Write validation](#write-validation)

2. [Memory buffer](#memory-buffer) 

3. [Write-Ahead Log (WAL) persistence](#wal-persistence)

4. [Queryable buffer](#query-availability) 

5. [Parquet storage](#parquet-storage) 

6. [In-memory cache](#in-memory-cache) 

##### Write Validation

> - Process: InfluxDB validates incoming data before accepting it into the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Process: The Ingest Router receives the write request and validates incoming data before accepting it into the system.
```

You might specify which architecture component is responsible for each step.

     
- Impact: Prevents malformed or unsupported data from entering the database.

##### Memory Buffer

> - Process: Incoming writes are stored in an in-memory buffer before persistence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Process: Incoming writes are stored in an in-memory buffer before persistence.
```
Change to active voice, maybe making the responsible component the subject.

- Impact: Increases ingestion efficiency by allowing batch processing.

- Tradeoff: Larger batches improve throughput but require more memory.

##### WAL Persistence

> - Process: The write buffer is flushed to the WAL every second (default).

Reviewer: Same here, active voice and name the actor.

- Impact: Ensures durability by persisting data to object storage.

- Tradeoff: More frequent flushing improves durability but increases I/O overhead.

##### Query Availability

> - Process: After WAL persistence, data moves to the queryable buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Process: After WAL persistence, data moves to the queryable buffer.
```

What component moves the data?

> - Process: The system moves data to the queryable buffer after WAL persistence.

Reviewer: I'll push a revision of this to show what I meant in my earlier comment.

Reviewer: 4dbdfba22c

- Impact: Enables fast queries on recent data.

- Tradeoff: A larger buffer speeds up queries but increases memory usage.

##### Parquet Storage

> - Process: Every ten minutes (default), data is persisted to Parquet files in object storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Process: Every ten minutes (default), data is persisted to Parquet files in object storage.
```

Use active voice.

- Impact: Provides durable, long-term storage.

- Tradeoff: More frequent persistence reduces reliance on the WAL but increases I/O costs.

##### In-Memory Cache

- Process: Recently persisted Parquet files are cached in memory.

- Impact: Reduces query latency by minimizing object storage access.

> ## Data flow

Reviewer: I think you can combine this section with the overview steps.

Reviewer: Fixed in 4dbdfba22c

## How Data Flows Through InfluxDB 3

> When data is written to InfluxDB 3, it progresses through multiple stages to ensure durability, optimize performance, and enable efficient querying. Configuration options at each stage affect system behavior, balancing reliability and resource usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When data is written to {{% product-name %}}, it progresses through multiple stages to ensure durability, optimize performance, and enable efficient querying. Configuration options at each stage affect system behavior, balancing reliability and resource usage.
```

### Write Path Overview

> When data is written to InfluxDB 3, it progresses through multiple stages to ensure durability, optimize performance, and enable efficient querying. Configuration options at each stage affect system behavior, balancing reliability and resource usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We don't need to repeat this if we keep it above.

> 1. **Write validation**: InfluxDB validates incoming data and rejects invalid points with an HTTP 400 error.

Reviewer: Because the sections below are brief (for now), the list item summaries seem redundant. If the sections below were longer, we might keep the summaries.

```suggestion
1. [Write validation](#write-validation)
```

2. **Memory buffer**: Valid data is stored in an in-memory buffer before being persisted.

3. **Write-Ahead Log (WAL) persistence**: Data is flushed from memory to the WAL every second (default), ensuring durability.

4. **Queryable buffer**: Persisted data becomes queryable once moved from the WAL to an in-memory buffer.

5. **Parquet storage**: Every ten minutes (default), InfluxDB writes data from the queryable buffer to object storage in Parquet format.

6. **In-memory cache**: Frequently queried Parquet files are cached in memory to improve performance.

> #### Write Path Details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
